# 2022-11-30 - EU Law

Directives can introduce direct effect, if they contain provisions that are provide rights, and are clear and unconditional, and if the State has failed to implement that.

Directives can be invoked only against States, not against other individuals, but with the "consistent interpretation" doctrine TODO.

Dansk Industri TODO.

The fact that the substance can prevail over the legal form is a general principle of EU law, also found in directives. 

## Recommendations and opinions

They're soft law instruments.

**Opinions** have to be **requested**, and express the institution's position on a certain issue.

**Recommendations** don't have to be requested, they imply addressees, and recommend acting in a certain way.

The above is **not an official distinction**, which hasn't been drawn, and there are cases where the distinction 

E.g. in infringement procedures, the first stage is a "diplomatic" one, at the end of which the Commission adopts a "reasoned opinion", in which they urge the infringing MS to cease their violation of EU law by a certain deadline.

If the MS misses the deadline, it's possible to proceed to bring the State before the EUCJ.

Despite being called an "opinion" it isn't requested, it has addressees, on which it imposes a certain obligation and deadline, so it would be more appropriate to call it a "recommendation".

## Grimaldi case (C-323/88)

Grimaldi was suffering from an occupational disease, and sought to obtain social assistance.

There was a recommendation by the EU Commission for MS to recognize a list of occupational diseases to strengthen social assistance.

Grimaldi's disease wasn't considered an occupational disease at the national level, but it was considered in the EU list.

The judges refused to recognize it, since recommendations aren't binding.

The Court ruled that while recommendations weren't binding, due to the principle of sincere cooperation, national judges have to have due regard for non-binding EU acts in applying national law to the case at stake.

The Court also seems to suggest that judges have an obligation to interpret national law in a way that complies with non-binding instruments where possible.  This makes soft law instruments somewhat binding, at least for interpretation purposes.

The Court also found that soft law instruments can have binding effects based on their wording, e.g. in banking recommendations.  The contents of the instrument are more important than their name.

## Other examples of binding opinions

<!-- TODO: google "EU banking recommendations binding effects", "banking supervision measures cases" -->

There are other examples of binding opinions.

There are three legislative procedures.

In the **consultative procedure**, the Council adopts the legal act by itself, but it has to ask the Parliament to give an opinion, which is non-binding.

In the **approval procedure**, the Parliament can provide a binding opinion and pose a veto.

The **Court of Justice** can provide opinions on draft agreements that the EU wants to conclude with a third country, to assess whether the draft is compatible with EU law.

According to intl. law, contracting parties can't invoke internal law to justify a breach of the treaty (art. 27 VCLT), States don't have to know each other's internal laws.

This prevents the EU from concluding an agreement that would force it to violate its own legal order, and to that effect, the opinion is binding.

## Costa v. ENEL

It was decided in 1964.

The Italian Constitutional court was asked to decide what happens in case of a clash between TODO: national law and international treaties?

At the time, the Community legal order and the Italian legal system were connected by a law, which incorporated the obligations from Community law into the Italian legal system (Law 1).

The Italian legislator introduced Law 2, which had nothing to do with Community law, but was in a policy field that the Community is competent in.

According to the Italian Constitutional court is that Law 2 should prevail over Law 1, since they have the same rank, and posterior law replaces earlier law in case of a contrast.

However, this argument means that Italy could leave the EU at any time, by simply using a law.

On the other hand, due to the **loyal clause, or principle of sincere cooperation**, EU law should prevail over the internal legal order, otherwise the individual States could undermine it.

At this early stage, the Court supported a **monistic approach**, whereas more recently by arguing the **independence and autonomy** of the EU legal order it implicitly supports a dualistic approach.

**The principle of primacy is not codified**, there is **no primary law provision** explicitly stating that EU law shall prevail.

The principle of primacy was elaborated by the EUCJ, but attempts to codify were rejected.

## Soft and hard primacy

**Soft primacy** is the doctrine of consistent interpretation.

**Hard primacy** means that **national judges have to set national law aside**, but **only if EU law is directly effective**.

National legislators should amend laws that are incompatible with EU law, and EU law can prevail over the constitutional law of MS as well.

TODO: Solange doctrine.
