# 2022-11-09 - EU Law

## Chen case

* The UK authorities stated that this was an abuse of rights.
* AG: what matters is ensuring that EU law is effective, so it doesn't matter how Catherine became a EU citizen.
* This allowed the AG to side-step the "abuse of rights" doctrine.
* The Court also takes into consideration the position of the child, and their inability to exercise rights on their own.
* Family members who are not EU citizens can also enjoy rights normally reserved to citizens.
* This is not a recognition of rights in itself, but necessary to prevent breaking up families.

## Partnerships

* EU law states that it's possible to recognize a partner as a family member, but only if the host State recognizes such partnerships.
* The EU can't impose recognition of parterships (same-sex couples) on MS, since that's a matter of family law, in which States have sovereignty.

## Long residence permits

* This situation is regulated by a directive.
* After 5 years of continuous legal and continuous residence, third-country nationals can enjoy equal treatment with nationals in certain aspects.

## Kamberaj case

* Kamberaj tried to make an application to access social housing.
* The social housing budget was larger for Italian and EU citizens, and smaller for third country nationals.
* Kamberaj argued that this clear-cut distinction didn't take into account the situation of third country nationals.
* The participation in the life of the country prevents discrimination.

## Right of TCNs in the contractual relations of the EU

* There was a regulation limiting the amount of TCNs that can be employed in a Spanish team.
* Igor Simutenkov found this provision discriminatory.
* TODO ...
* There is a sort of discrimination, depending on the nature of the agreement with the third country.
* Newer agreements aren't directly effective, but this is done on purpose so that the implementing measures, and not the judges, determine how to define non-discrimination.
* Any non-discrimination measure adds an economic burden to the State, which becomes more relevant in times of crisis.

## Dhahbi case

* The EU created an association agreement with Tunisia, which included a non-discrimination clause regarding access to social security.
* The EU Court of Justice was not involved, and the Corte di Cassazione decided the merit of the case by itself.
* The ECHR found that non-discrimination clauses are still effective, even if they're not directly effective according to the agreement.
* The downside is that one has to try all the internal remedies first, and then enforce the judgment.
* (TODO: exceptions to the non-discrimination clause in the Charter)







