# 2022-10-19

* The Constitutional Treaty also introduced a safeguard mechanism for M.S. that are **no longer interested in sharing the EU values**.
* The **exit clause** was introduced as a **safeguard** for the States that joined in 2004.
* The decision to leave is **unilateral** and **voluntary**.
* This means that **States can't be expelled**, and States are unlikely to leave unilaterally, given the advantages of membership.
* A State would have to be pressured to leave.
* Before the Lisbon treaty, there was **no express clause** granting States the right to leave the Union.
* If there is no specific EU clause, the fallback is international law.
* According to the VCLT, the general rule is that without an explicit rule, States can't leave an organization, unless this possibility is **implied** in the intention of the parties, or (not "and") the nature of the organization.
* The treaties mandate a continuous process of integration.
* However, the M.S. are still the "masters of the treaties", and may decide to leave.
* TODO: Greenland.
* The Lisbon Treaty regulated the requirements and procedure for a State to leave in art. 50.
* After the **notification of the intention to leave**, after 2 years at most (but the deadline can be delayed) the State will no longer be bound by EU law.
* If a State that exited wants to rejoin the EU, it can, but it has to undergo the accession process like every other third country.
* There are some limitations on the State leaving the EU.
* **Procedural limitations** include the process defined to leave, but exceptions can be made.
* **Municipal law** is relevant for art. 50, which is unusual, since usually national law is irrelevant to international law.
* It's meant to allow the democratic control over the decision to leave (TODO: Miller case?)
* Implied limitation: it's not possible for the State to only partially leave the EU (TODO).
* It's possible for States to unilaterally revoke the intention to leave.
* A few months before Brexit, since there was no withdrawal agreement yet, the possibility of revoking the intention to leave was discussed.
* The Court of Justice decided the case in its full composition.
* The Court describes a Member State who has decided to leave the Union as a **sovereign State**, which means they **do not have to give due regard to EU law**, and that the **only requirements** are the **constitutional requirements** (TODO).
* The Court is **still recognizing the sovereignty** of MS.
* The negotiation on future relations in Brexit was discussed at a later stage, which proved to be an issue.
* The withdrawal agreement is an ordinary agreement, the kind that would be concluded with third countries, and must respect EU primary law, while the accession treaty modifies the treaties, primary law.
* This means that in theory, the Court of Justice could judge a withdrawal agreement to be in contrast with EU law.
* The withdrawal agreement in Brexit is strictly related to EU law, since it's concluded between the EU and a leaving State.
* E.g., the application of the agreement follows the same rules as EU law, art. 5 is titled "Good faith" and is analogous in content to the principle of sincere cooperation.
