# 2022-11-16 - EU Law

* The Outright Monetary Transactions was introduced in 2012, and based on a strict conditionality mechanism based on the EFSM and ESM.

## Gauweiler case

* In the Gauweiler case, it was argued that the ECB was acting outside of its competence, and that according to EU law, the ECB can't buy debt from MS.

## EU economic competence

* The Outright Monetary Transactions program was outside the competence of the ECB, because it's a matter of economic cooperation.
* The EU can only adopt non-binding and coordination measures, w/r/t the economic policy of States.  It can also adopt binding measures, but which only have an indirect effect on the economic policy of States.
* In fact, the ESM was created outside of the EU framework specifically because the EU had no competence in economic policy.
* The EUCJ adopted a formalistic approach, and uses the **center of gravity** doctrine.
* It's the same formalistic approach used in the EU-Turkey statement case, where it had to decide on the legal nature of the statement, and it only considered the fact that it was adopted by the MS, and ignoring the substantive elements.
* According to the center of gravity doctrine, the OMT program is considered a matter of monetary policy, with economic policy side-effects.

## ECB's prohibition to buy debt

* The ECB is not buying debt directly from States, but in the secondary market (private debtors, banks, etc.).
* It's acting as a private entity, not as a public institution, so in a purely formalistic sense, it's not violating EU law.
* However, the practical effect is that the EU is buying sovereign debt.

## Significance of the decision

* The OMT has never been used in practice, and the decision before the court was only to decide if it could be introduced.

## Public Sector Purchase Program, or Quantitative Easing (QE)

* The 2012 OMT program was set aside, and the QE program was introduced.
* It ran into the same issues as the Gauweiler case.
* The German Supreme Court asks the EUCJ for a preliminary ruling on the validity of the QE.
* It also states that if it's found to be legal, then it would mean that the Court of Justice is extending the competence of the EU, and that would violate the Constitution of Germany.
* The competence of the EU can be expanded, but only according to the constitutional procedures of the M.S.
* In Weiss, the EUCJ confirmed the previous decision.
* The German constitutional court reacted by affirming that the EUCJ is acting ultra vires, and that the judgment shouldn't be respected.
* During the pandemic, the Pandemic Purchase Program was introduced, which is quite similar to the QE program.
* The German constitutional court's opposition could prevent its adoption.

## Reactions to the German constitutional court

* The ECB merely restated that it's acting within its mandate, as the EUCJ had stated.
* The EUCJ released a press statement, in which it argues that only the EUCJ can determine if a piece of EU legislation is invalid, and that's not for the national courts to decide, or else every national court would interpret EU law in their way, and there would be no consistency.
* The Commission restated that monetary policy is the exclusive competence of the EU, EU law has primacy over national law, and the judgments of the EUCJ are binding on all national courts.
* In times of crises, the adoption of emergency measures that bend the competence of institutions can lead to problems.

## Allocation of competences between the EU and MS

* The catalog of EU competences is a codification of the case law of the EUCJ, and to introduce some new elements.
* The EU can conclude conventions, but in some cases (Monaco, San Marino, the Vatican, or if international conventions require that only States and not international organizations), the MS can act as **trustees** for the EU, and represent it, with the EU's organization.
* Other exception for MS: TODO.

## Exclusive competences

* Are listed in art. 3 TFEU.
* "Exclusive competence" doesn't mean complete freedom of action, but due to the principle of conferral, primary law provisions detail exactly what the EU can do, and how.
* The **principle of proportionality** requires assessing whether an intervention by the EU is needed, whether the solutions are proportional to the issue at stake, and
* The **principle of coherence** TODO, hasn't been used directly by the Court.

## Shared competences

* The majority of EU competences are shared ones.
* If the EU acts, then States are preempted from acting.
* The **subsidiarity principle** means that decisions should be taken close to the addressees.
* For some issues (international crime, environmental protection), it's necessary to protect them at the international level.
* Even though the subsidiarity principle is enforceable, it's used rarely by the Court, only in the cases of the most severe and self-evident violations.

## Supporting competences

* They're created to coordinate the legal systems of MS.

## Other competences

* The Common Foreign Security Policy is different from the other nature, and is characterized by strong intergovernmentalism.
* Economic policy: TODO.
