# 2022-10-24

* While the (TODO) agreement was closer to EU law, the trade and cooperation agreement is closer to international law.
* Art. 9 TEU: the second part states that EU citizenship is a **supplementary status**, granted to all citizens in MS, which doesn't replace national citizenship.
* In theory, the allocation of competences is simple: national citizenship comes first, EU citizenship is a consequence.

## Micheletti case

* In the Micheletti case (C-369/90), Micheletti had a double citizenship (Italian and Argentinian).
* Relying on the fact that he had Italian citizenship, he decided to move to Spain, and (TODO) as a dentist.
* According to Spanish law, if an individual has a dual nationality, but neither is Spanish, the nationality that prevails is the one of the country where one's interests are in.
* In Micheletti's case, he was considered an Argentinian citizen, which meant he couldn't enjoy rights granted to EU citizens.
* However, national law and national prerogatives with "due regard to EU law", they have to take into account the consequences of EU law.
* Therefore, national law can't completely rule out the application of EU law, and render it ineffective.

## Rottmann Case

* Rottmann was a tax consultant, and had criminal procedures.
* He decided to become a German citizen, which is easier for Austrian citizens.
* However, according to Austrian law, he lost his previous citizenship.
* Later, German authorities found out that he hadn't mentioned the previous criminal charges in his country of origin, in his citizenship application.
* The application was withdrawn, and Rottmann lost his German citizenship too.
* This raised the problem as to whether not having a citizenship was a situation compatible with EU law.
* AG Maduro's opinion affirms that EU law is a municipal order, and while it's linked to the legal system of MS and intl. law, it maintains a certain amount of independence.
* He specifies "**destined to become**" (TODO).
* The Court of Justice **isn't** saying that this situation is against EU law, but that the MS has to have **due regard** for EU law, and apply the **principle of proportionality**, when the final decision will be taken by national authorities.

## Economic crisis and citizenship

* Some countries tried to restrict access to EU rights, because they represented an economic burden.
* Some countries decided to sell citizenships to third-country nationals. E.g., Malta and Cyprus.
* This way, someone buying a Maltese or Cypriot citizens would grant the EU freedoms, and most importantly, **it makes it easier to obtain visas**.
* E.g., it was difficult for Russian citizens to obtain a US visa.
* The problem is whether investor citizenship schemes (which in theory are a State's prerogative to adopt) violate EU law.
* Such schemes violate the principle of sincere cooperation, and the fundamental spirit of EU citizenship (which isn't a commodity).
* The Commission has brought an infringement procedure against Malta.
* In the Nottebohm case, which is an international law case, a link is required.

## Nottebohm case

* The ICJ relied on the general link doctrine only to invoke diplomatic protection.
* Citizenship is an entirely different matter, and in fact in international law there are no limitations on paying to obtain citizenship.
* This is because States are free to determine the requirements for citizenship.

## EU arguments: sincere cooperation

* The sincere cooperation argument is that this could put strain on the MS (unlikely, since citizenships are bought by wealthy people who won't require social assistance).
* Furthermore, very few people are requesting citizenship.
* There is the issue of EU citizenships being used as a political tool.

## (cont.): value of EU citizenship

* MS are still able to influence how EU citizenship is applied.
* Therefore, it's still possible for them to treat it as a commodity, even though that's against the intended purpose.
* Some States (e.g. Italy) sell residence permits (which isn't citizenship, but makes it easier to obtain it later).

## Gibraltar case

* There was an issue, whether the citizens of Gibraltar could benefit from EU political rights (vote or be elected).
* At the time, the UK didn't recognize EU voting rights for the people of Gibraltar.
* A Gibraltar citizen brought a case against the UK in the European Court of Human Rights.
* The Court condemned the UK for violating the European Convention of Human Right, even though the Convention protects municipal elections, and this was a supranational election.
* The UK was forced to extend voting rights, and Miss Mathews was able to vote.
* The Kingdom of Spain considered this extension by the UK a violation of its sovereignty.
* The citizens of Gibraltar were not EU citizens, and therefore couldn't participate in EU elections.
