# 2022-11-10 - EU Law

## Art. 13 TEU

Lists the institutional framework of the EU, and the principles governing their action.

**Effectiveness** means that institutions must be able to exercise their power.

**Consistency** means that the institutions can't interfere with each other.

**Conferred** is the **principle of conferral**, institutions can't act outside of their mandate.

**Mutual sincere cooperation** is an application of horizontal sincere cooperation.

There are two further, implicit principles in art. 13:

It's possible to have a **differentiation** in the procedural rules, depending on the domain the institution is acting in (e.g. CFSP), to guarantee consistency,

The **institutional balance** means that the various powers (e.g., law-making) are split up between various institutions.

The European Council proposes the political strategies, the European Commission turns the political proposals into legislative proposals, the European Parliament and Council of the EU are the analogues of the two chambers in a national parliament.

## European Council

Composed of the **heads of State or government** (depends on the constitutional organization of each State), normally adopts political statements, but exceptionally can exercise a legislative power and adopt binding instruments.

Art. 7 TEU allows the European Council to take a binding decision.

**President of the European Council**: is in charge of defining the agenda, the European Council meets at least twice a year, and also has **representative powers**, which may overlap with the High Representative.

The European Council is the **highest political** institution.

## Council

It's composed of representatives of each State at ministerial level, and there isn't a single composition, but it depends entirely on the issues being discussed.

To solve the issues of consistency and continuity, due to the fact that ministers can't constantly follow the topics, the COREPER (French acronym, it's a committee of permanent representatives of member states).

The COREPER meets every week, to solve the issues of continuity. There are two agendas, one for topics the COREPER was able to reach an agreement on (the A list), and one for topics where that didn't happen (the B list).

The "topics" are legislative proposals that the Commission must discuss.

In the next meeting of the Commission, the ministers only discuss the B-list (legislative proposals for which COREPER wasn't able to reach a consensus), to save time and ensure consistency.

## Presidency of the EU

It's rotated every 6 months, and the President of the EU decides the composition for the Council (TODO).

## EU Parliament

There is a right to elect and be elected in the EU Parliament for EU citizens.

There's no common electoral law, only some common principles.

The voting period can take place on certain days, and the results of States that voted earlier can't be published.

It's no longer possible to be both in the EU Parliament, and also be a member of a national, regional, etc. parliament.

The EU Parliament has two seats, in two separate countries.

The EU Parliament can establish inquiry committees to check the implementation of EU law.

The EU Parliament has a president.

## EU Commission

It's composed by individuals acting on behalf of the EU, and promote the interest of the EU.

There are 27 commissioners, one for each MS, but they don't strictly have to be nationals of the MS.

The appointment of the Commission is done by the other two political bodies, the Parliament and (TODO) and it's normally done after the Parliament.

The Commission is **organized** like a government, but it **doesn't have executive power**, the **States have executive power**, and the Commission only has a **residual power to execute EU law, if MS are no longer able to**.

It has various powers:

* Proposing legislation, as a neutral body that won't prioritize national interests, unlike M.S.
* The "Guardian of the treaties"
* Anti-trust powers
* Representative power

## Representation of the EU

The representation of the EU is done by three individuals: the president of the European Council, the president of the Commission, and the High Representative.
