# 2022-09-21 - EU Law

## EU as an international organization

* **Regional** organizations are meant to include a limited member of States, but not necessarily on a geographical criterion.
* Universal organizations are meant to include as many States as possible.
* E.g., the UN is a universal organization, while NATO and the EU are regional organizations, with strong political control over who joins.
* **Political** international organizations vs **technical** I.O.
* EU can create **integration between the legal orders of M.S.**

## History of the EU integration process

* May 9, 1950: a speech was given by the former President of France, Schumann declaration??? TODO
* It represents the political manifesto of the EU integration process.
* The objective was to avoid new world wars in the European continent, by preventing disputes between countries that could start a war.
* Coal and steel were used to produce energy and weapons, and were a possible cause of disputes between France and Germany, which were countries capable of starting a war.
* To prevent conflicts, an independent authority would control the market of coal and steel, in the general interest of all parties to this agreement,
* The entity should be able to **decide by majority, rather than unanimity**.
* The entity should be able to **adopt binding decisions and impose duties on participating States**.
* The entity should be able to **control that the law is respected**.
* This is the **community method**, and compared to classical international organizations, there are differences.
* E.g., in the UN the States in the Security Council all have a veto power, and can prevent a decision, while in the EU, this is less frequent, and decisions are taken by a qualified majority.
* In the UN, it's unusual to take binding decisions, they're only taken for financial obligations towards the UN, in the EU ??? TODO
* In the UN there is a court, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) has two main objectives, the first is resolving disputes between States.
* E.g., there is a dispute between Italy and Germany on retribution for damages during the Nazi occupation.
* Second objective ??? TODO

## Paris Treaty (1951)

* The treaty entered into force in 1952, after all M.S. have ratified the treaty.
* Ratification is the formal decision to respect the treaty, the procedure is normally regulated at the constitutional level, usually the head of State ratifies treaties.

## Rome Treaty (1957)

* Two new communities were created, the European Community on Nuclear Energy, and the European Community.
* Each community had its own institutional framework.
* In 1965, a common framework for all three communities was created.

## Single European Act (1986)

* By now, the integration process had led to having 12 M.S.
* After the success of the three communities, it was decided to increase the degree of cooperation.
* The objective was to introduce a "single" or "common" European policy (hence the name).

## Maastricht treaty (1992)

* It introduced the European Union.
* The Union at that time was a "Greek temple" built on three pillars.
* The "basement" were the principles of the EU legal order, and the "roof" is the institutional framework, which is inspired by the "Community Method" in the first pillar.
* The first pillar included the three Communities.
* The second pillar is the Common Foreigner Security Policy (CFSP), where most decisions are taken by unanimity, few binding decisions, and no jurisdictional control by the Court of Justice.
* The third pillar is the Justice and Home Affairs (JHA), for justice and police cooperation.
* Each pillar has the same institutions, but different working methods.
* In the JHA unanimity is not the rule, but it's still present, traditional international law instruments can be used, and judicial control is present, but limited.
* Each pillar represents a different degree of integration, with the JHA being a middle ground between the Community method and the traditional international law method.
* The Court of Justice applied principles developed in the first pillar, to the third pillar.

## Amsterdam treaty (1997)

* Some of the topics in the JHA pillar were moved to the first one, so that only police and judicial cooperation (the most sensitive domains for M.S.) remained in the third pillar.

## Treaty for the Constitution of Europe (2004)

* Meaning of "constitutional" ??? TODO
* Opposition by France and The Netherlands.

## Lisbon Treaty (2007)

* It entered into force in 2009.
* It simplified the "temple" into a single pillar, the European Union.
* The European Community on Coal and Steel terminated in 2002, since it was mandated to last for 50 years.
* The differentiated treatment of certain fields was not lost.
* Constitutional elements, return to a traditional international organization.
