# 2022-11-07 - European Law

## Limitations to the freedom to move and reside, principle of proportionality

* In particular, the right to move and reside in other EU countries.
* According to the Charter, there is an absolute right to move and resides.
* However, the TFEU introduces limitations in art. 21(1): national security, public health, public order.
* Limitations are subject to the **principle of proportionality**.
* Limitations must be **needed**: the restriction must be absolutely necessary, and if there are other possibilities to deal with the issue, they should be used instead.
* Limitations must also be **temporary**: the restriction must be limited to the extent of the emergency, and can't be used to impose structural limitations on the freedom of movement.
* Limitations must be **limited in scope to specific individuals**: e.g., all citizens from a certain M.S. or ethnic background can't be considered a threat to public order, since it would be too broad.
* The **threat must be actual**: e.g., threats that existed in the past don't matter, unless they're still relevant in the present moment.

## Directive 2004/38/EC - residence duration

* For residence up to 3 months, only a valid ID is required, and no further conditions are required due to the short duration of the stay.
* For residence longer than 5 years, it's not possible for States to require further conditions, since there is already a strong connection to the State.
* In the intermediate case (between 3 months and 5 years), there are various requirements, but the general requirement is that EU citizens can't be a burden on the host State.
* Being a "burden" doesn't refer to a fixed amount of money, but must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

## Brey case

* The general background is that EU citizens should be free to enjoy their EU rights, but with certain limitations.
* This necessitates a test, and in 2013 the EUCJ created a vaguely-worded test.
* This meant that States had to be flexible, and that the EU Commission could possibly bring an infringement procedure, and the EUCJ would have the final word.

## Dano case

* In 2014, the Court introduced a new element, the limitations on the free movement are designed to protect the social 
* In the Bray case, the Court didn't want the States to excessively limit the free movement, but in this case the EUCJ wanted to demonstrate to the public opinion that free movement is not harmful to social security.
* This decision was taken at the end of the transitional period for Romania and Bulgaria, when their citizens weren't allowed to move.
* This decision was also criticized for downplaying the role of economic solidarity between M.S.
* EU citizenship still hasn't become the fundamental status of the EU integration process, since it can be reduced during a period of economic crisis.
