# 2022-10-27 - EU law

## Cilevics case

* It's related to national identity in the EU.

## Introduction to the internal market rules

* Originally the internal market was purely economic.
* At present, the internal market also includes social and environmental aspects.
* The internal market provides rights to individuals (c.f. the Van Gend en Loos case, the Community grants rights to individuals).
* The internal market mainly imposes obligations on Member States, but only concerns non-purely-internal situations.
* They're not absolute rights, but relative, and there can be exceptions.
* In introducing exception, Member States have to interpret them in a strict manner.
* The four freedoms in the internal market include the free movement of persons, which in itself includes the freedom of establishment, and set up an economic activity in another MS [TODO].

## Introduction to the preliminary ruling for interpretation

* It's a form of cooperation between national and EU judges.
* If the national judge has to apply EU law, but has doubts about how to interpret it, they stay the proceedings, and submits the questions to the EUCJ.
* The EUCJ provides an interpretation of EU law, which is binding on the referring court, because of the primacy doctrine.
* The judge has to interpret national law in conformance with the EUCJ's judgement.
* It's highly unlikely that a constitutional court would request the EUCJ for a judgement, but this happened in the Cilevics case.

## National identity

* Is defined in art. 4(2) TEU, and concerns the fundamental structures, political and constitutionals.
* It was introduced by the MS, as a counter-limit to the limitation of sovereignty that is due to participating in the EU.
* Several judgements by the EUCJ (Van Gend en Loos and others) led to the expansion of the autonomy of the EU, which meant that MS were bound by EU law.
* This led to MS adopting a rule to counter the "judicial activism" by the EUCJ.
* In the case law of the EUCJ, national identity is usually the subject of preliminary rulings, but sometimes it's the subject of infringement procedures as well.
* The reasons MS invoke the national identity clause is to side-step EU law.

## Cilevics case (C-391/20)

* It's important because it deals with national identity, and could've led to the clarification of the national identity clause.
* A law was passed in Latvia, requiring higher education institutions to use the Latvian language to be used (except for a few institutions that were regulated by special statutes).
* While it may seem like a purely internal situation, it is relevant for the internal market, since it limits the ability of individuals and legal persons from other MS to establish higher education services in Latvia.
* It's possible to limit the freedom of establishment (art. 49 TFEU), but exceptions must have a strong case for them, in this case the protection of national language as an expression of national identity (art. 4(2) TEU).

## Protection of national language

* It's not explicitly mentioned in art. 4(2), but it's possible to interpret it in such a way to include the protection of national language, this connection was already established by the EUCJ.
* The AG gave his opinion in March 2022, he argued that the Court has never elaborated on the concept of national identity, and that he should attempt to do so himself.
* Art. 4(2) refers to core constitutional concerns, but the exact contents of the provision are unclear, and it's hard to determine whether national constitutional courts, or the EUCJ should define them.
<!-- * Proportionality principle () -->

## EUCJ's decision

* The EUCJ took a "diplomatic" approach, and argued that the measure is lawful only if it doesn't "seriously undermine" the freedom of establishment, and there's a breach only if the measure provides for no exceptions.
* Defining the national identity was a sort of "Pandora's box".

## AG's opinion

* National identity is best defined by national constitutional courts, since many sensitive national aspects are involved.
* Supranational courts would be less aware of those national aspects, and should leave the proportionality test to national courts.
* Furthermore, the exceptions provided by Latvian law are too few and ineffective.
* The AG carries out the proportionality test, and finds that the Latvian law would be a national overreach on the freedom of establishment, and would violate several provisions in the fundamental rights Charter.
* Since the AG's opinion isn't binding, he felt like he could go further with his decisions.
