# 2022-11-28 - EU Law

## Directives

* Impose an obligation of results on the MS.
* The only recipients can be MS.
* There are two relevant dates: the date in which the directive enters into force (20 days if unspecified in the directive itself), and the deadline for its implementation.
* Once in force, and until the deadline, the directive can't impose specific obligations on MS, except for the general obligation not to undermine the objective of the directive.
* Before the deadline, the Commission can't start infringement proceedings against a State for failing to implement the directive, that's possible only afterwards.
* In general, the directive can't produce direct effects, which can only be produced by the national implementation.
* However, this is not always true.

## Van Duyn case

* Ms. Van Duyn is a Dutch national, and is looking for a job.
* She finds an offer in the UK as a secretary for a Scientology church, and decide to move there.
* The UK government considered Scientology's activities to be a threat to national security, and asked Van Duyn to leave the country.
* The UK hadn't implemented a directive, and so Ms. Van Duyn's lawyers had to rely on the contents of the directive itself.
* A judge wasn't sure whether this was possible, and so asked the CJEU for a preliminary ruling on the matter.
* In par. 12, the Court explains that due to the "useful effect" doctrine, the individual can directly rely on the content of the directive, as long as it is clear, precise and unconditional, and the deadline for implementation has passed without the MS implementing it, if the implementation was only partial, or it was wrongly implemented.
* The Court recognized the direct effect of directives for the first time.
* The potential direct effect of directives can be seen as a sort of sanctions against MS, so that they can't neutralize them by simply not implementing them.

## Marshall case

* Ms. Marshall had to retire, and the retirement age for women was different than that for men.
* She decided to challenge the act determining retirement ages before a national judge.
* Directives are pieces of EU legislation with a specific addressee (MS), and can only impose obligations on MS, therefore individuals can't use the direct effect of a directive against another individual, but only against the State.
* The hospital was considered a public service (even private entities that provide essential services, such as healthcare, can be considered public for the purposes of directives).

## Ms. Faccini Dori case

* Ms. Faccini Dori bought an encyclopedia outside of a store.
* Later, she regretted the purchase, and decided to rely on a directive that allowed buyers to TODO.

## Marleasing SA

* The factual background isn't so important.
* If there is an inter-individual dispute, it's possible to consider the directive, along with national law.
* According to the "consistent interpretation" doctrine, the directive can be used to interpret national law, but only as long as the directive is not inconsistent with the literal meaning of national law.

## Frankovich

* A directive established the creation of a national fund, so that employees can receive a salary even if their employer is in economic difficulty.
* Italy did not transpose this directive in time.
* Mr. Frankovich was denied access to this fund, and decided to sue the State, and ask for pecuniary damages.
* If the directive had to not be implemented by the deadline, the directive recognized rights to the individual, there are pecuniary damages, and those damages are the direct consequence of the missed implementation, then the affected individuals can bring the case before a national judge.
* The direct effectiveness of the directive isn't relevant, but the fact that it recognizes a right is.
* Therefore, while it's not possible to recognize the horizontal effect of directive, the CJEU found that it's still possible to use directives as the basis for interpretation, or pecuniary damages.

## Mangold case

* It's a preliminary reference, related to a labor law dispute.
* In general, if a fixed-term contract is renewed multiple times then it has to be converted into a contract without a fixed term, to avoid exploiting the worker.
* However, in Germany this doesn't apply, so that it's easier for older people can find a job more easily.
* The directive contained the principle of non-discrimination, which is also a general principle of EU law, therefore it can be applied against any subject of the EU legal order, even in a dispute between private citizens, as was the case here.
* This judgment was criticized because the Court is changing the meaning of a directive too much.

## Dansk Industri

* In the case of a conflict between Directive 2000/78/EC (containing a provision on non-discrimination based on age), and Danish national law, the second would have to be set aside, and the former would prevail, because it was the codification of a general principle of law.
* This decision by the CJEU led to a reaction by the Supreme Court of Denmark, which pointed out that since the act of accession didn't contain a reference to the general principles of law, then the EUCJ was acting ultra vires.
