# 2022-10-17 - EU Law

* Strategies for the implementation of the principle of sincere cooperation, especially in the field of protection of rule of law.
* Art. 7 is seen as a nuclear option by the MS.
* Rule of law is a fundamental value, on which other foundational values are built.
* The ordinary infringement procedure was used in 2012, to address a substantial violation of the rule of law principle when the government tried to lower the maximum age for judges.
* More recently, art. 2 (listing the fundamental values) and art. 19 (obligations of MS towards the EU, with regards to implementing EU law) were used in connection.
* Art. 2 can't be used as the basis for a judgement, since it's a general principle.
* Art. 19 was useful in this context, since it mandates access to justice, which is an aspect of the rule of law (mentioned in art. 2).
* The downside of this approach is that a specific provision that gives more concrete meanings to general principles must be found, which isn't always easy.
* In the Republika case, art. 2 was connected with art. 49 (requirements for a State to join).
* In any case, the ordinary infringement procedure always requires a violation, whereas in art. 7 it's possible to trigger the procedure even in the mere possibility of a violation.
* Poland and Hungary **criticized the approach taken by the Court of Justice**.
* The organization of the judiciary is a purely national concern, over which the Court of Justice has no jurisdiction.
* Art. 7 already exists and is lex specialis, and if the Court uses the infringement procedure, it's side-stepping an already-existing procedure.
* Regarding national prerogatives, they can be exercised **having due regard for EU law**.
* The fact that the Court of Justice is exercising its jurisdiction **doesn't prevent the application of art. 7**, it's not a circumvention of the treaties, but it's an alternative, complementary remedy to art. 7.
* In July 2020, there was a meeting of the European Council, during which it was decided to introduce "Next Generation EU" (the most relevant reaction against Coronavirus) and a conditionality mechanism to make sure that the rule of law was respected.
* The Polish and Hungarian prime ministers discussed a joint political strategy regarding the decisions.
* The two countries were ready to pose a veto on the multi-annual financial framework in the EU, if there was an agreement to introduce the conditionality mechanism.
* The multi-annual financial framework is defined every 7 years, and requires unanimity, and even a single veto can block the adoption of all financial measures.
* In December 2020, the conflict was resolved, and **Next Generation EU was adopted with the conditionality mechanism (regulation)**.
* The Regulation 2020/2092 was adopted together with the Regulation for Next Generation EU, at the end of 2020.
* According to these regulations, the sanctions consist in freezing funds, instalments, etc., in the case of violation of rule of law in protecting the EU budget.
* The **first point** of the compromise is that the regulation is in effect, but its implementation and the adoption of guidelines is delayed.
* However, the **Commission** is the institution that decides whether to implement regulations, since it's the legislator.
* The European Council is not a legislator, and yet it's giving the Council directions.
* Furthermore, one would have to wait until a case is brought before the Court of Justice, and wait for the judgement, which takes 16 months in average.
* The general idea was to **delay the implementation** of the regulation, to give more time to Hungary and Poland.
* Hungary and Poland did bring the regulation before the Court, arguing that the legal basis used by the regulation is wrong, and that it violates art. 7.
* However, the Court replied that the protection of fundamental rights is everywhere in the treaties, and [TODO].
* In point 145, the values in art. 2 TEU define the identity of the EU, who must be able to defend those values.
* In point 144, compliance with art. 2 TEU is a **condition to enjoy the rights in the Treaties**.
* This implies that if a MS violates those values, there could consequences for the enjoyment of rights by MS, but this isn't stated in the judgement.
* It hasn't elaborated on this point, but it's possible to suspend a State's rights or even expel it, if they do not uphold EU values.
* At present, there are no expulsion clauses in EU law, since the integration process is meant to be continuous, and the only way to leave is on a voluntary basis.
* Expulsion clauses exit in other international organizations.
* Expulsions could create issues with regards to citizens in MS.
* In October 2021, the **Polish constitutional court** argues that art. 1 TEU (foundation of EU) and art. 4(3) (sincere cooperation) are incompatible with the Polish constitution, if they're interpreted in a way that's incompatible with the constitutional.
* Art. 19(1) is also declared inconsistent with the constitution.
* This decision has been interpreted by some as a de facto withdrawal from the EU, since it's calling into question art. 1 TEU, and asserting that the Polish constitution should always prevail.
* Poland is not making a declaration of general incompatibility, it's just against the new attitude of the Court, and is trying to reinterpret the mandate of the Court.
* It's not a declaration, it's a message directed at the Court of Justice, who later reacted back.
* A decision by the judges, even if it's the constitutional court, can't be considered a withdrawal declaration.
* At present, Poland has no intention to leave the EU.
