# 2022-12-01 - EU Law

## Taricco case

In the **Taricco case**, there was a EU provision requiring the prosecution of VAT offenses, and an Italian provision restricting the terms for said prosecution.

The Italian Constitutional Court was ready to use the counter-limits doctrine, since the reform was strictly related to the principle of legality in criminal law.

In the first ruling, the Court of Justice asserted the absolute primacy of EU law, but the Constitutional Court asked the EUCJ to reinterpret their first judgment.

The Court of Justice in their second judgment stated that while EU law should prevail, judges can evaluate the possible contrasts with fundamental constitutional values at the national level.

It's an application of the principle of sincere cooperation between judges.

## National identities clause

It's a question of counter-limits, since it's about he fundamental elements of a State's identity or culture.

## Ultra vires argument

E.g. Dansk industry, the German Supreme Court in 2020.

If the CJEU is acting beyond its mandate, then there's a violation of the principle of conferral, and therefore the sovereignty of States, and therefore its judgment can't be imposed on the MS.

## Judicial control

The **Court of auditors** is  an ad-hoc EU institution, charged with monitoring the budget.

But despite the name of "court" it does **not** have jurisdictional functions, it's a purely administrative body.  In some MS, the Court of auditors are jurisdictional institution.

The jurisdictional control in the EU is strictly related to the rule of law, which was already established back when the EU was called the European Community.

Rule of law can be enforced both at the EU (supranational) dimension, and at the national dimension, to ensure that the subjects of EU law will at both levels will respect it, and the instruments are complementary.

The enforcement of EU law by individuals is mainly done at the national level.

Art. 19 codifies the relationship between the two levels, which are also bound by the principle of sincere cooperation.  The preliminary ruling mechanism was introduced in order to ensure consistency and coherence 

## Compensation for serious violations of EU law

There are two main judicial instruments to control the behavior of MS: the **infringement procedure**, and (cf. Frankovich) the possibility to bring a State before a national judge for damages.

In Frankovich, the judgment was about the failure to implement a directive, but more broadly, in the case of any **serious violation of EU law resulting in pecuniary damages**

If a **judge of last instance** doesn't stay the proceedings and ask for the intervention of the Court, then they're liable.

TODO: Failure to do so allows the individual to bring the State (not the judge) before another judge, to ask for compensation.

TODO: liability of judges in Italy after Frankovich.

There's no definition of what a "serious violation" is, but in general, any violation of EU law is seen as "serious" (e.g. implementation of a directive, preliminary ruling, etc.).

## Infringement procedure

The goal isn't to punish the State, even though it's possible to impose sanctions, or compensate the victims, but rather, to restore the rule of law.

The infringement procedure and the compensation for serious violations can be used together, since they have different purposes.

MS don't use the infringement procedure often (as it causes friction between States), it's usually the Commission, as a neutral institution.

There are two stages (cf. prev. lesson).

It starts with a notification to the State, who may then decide to respond and provide arguments in its defense, which the Commission will evaluate.

The Commission's decision to start the procedure, and any other subsequent decisions are political decisions, and their validity can't be challenged.

Sometimes two MS are liable for the same violation, but the Commission only starts the proceedings against one, which is seen as a double standard, but there are usually reasons for this.

The Commission gives a deadline, and if it's satisfied with the results achieved before that deadline they will close the procedure.

The Court of Justice can adopt a declaratory judgment (asserting a State has violated EU law), and can adopt interim relief measures.

If a State acts after the deadline, and removes the violation, the Court can still act against the State, because it can only consider what happened before the deadline, and it still needs to formally resolve the violation.

Sanctions consist in a fixed amount of money (based on the population and economic relevance to the Union), and a variable amount (based on the duration and severity).

Sanctions are executed by withholding money that would've been otherwise sent to that country, since the EU can't force countries to pay.

TODO: dispute between States?
