# 2022-10-12 - EU Law

* Sweden decides to act unilaterally to ban a pollutant, after the EU failed to find a common position.
* The EUCJ was asked to determine if Sweden had violated the principle of sincere cooperation.
* Sweden argued that since finding a common position was impossible, and there was no definitive decision, they didn't violate the principle of sincere cooperation.
* Sweden argues that the **principle of sincere cooperation is mutual**, and EU institutions should recognize that if it's impossible to act at a supranational level, then MS should be allowed to act unilaterally, **especially if it's to protect an interest** of concern to the EU (in this case, environmental protection).
* The EUCJ doesn't address Sweden's argument, only the Commission's, creating an imbalance in favor of the EU.
* The Court shifted attitude, originally it was the institution who stressed mutuality, which was later codified in the Lisbon Treaty.
* Now it tends to avoid using art. 4(3), and use other principles, to avoid bringing up the mutual aspect of the principle.
* In the Sweden case, there isn't an obligation of result (States have to act in the same way), but an obligation of content (States have to achieve the same objective).
* The **Copenhagen dilemma** refers to how it's easier for the EU to control that candidate countries respect EU fundamental values, than current MS.
* While it's possible to bring a State before the EUCJ for violating EU obligations, **art. 7 TEU** is a **political infringement procedure**, intended to make sure that MS respect fundamental values.
* The **early warning mechanism** doesn't require a concrete violation, a **serious risk is also sufficient**, but there should be a clear risk of a **systemic violation of EU law**.
* No action is taken, but the declaration of the warning is still a strong political message to the country in question.
* The procedure is complex, with high thresholds for the decisions.
* It's a peer review exercise by the other EU countries.
* In Austria there was an extremist party who was one of the winners in the election, back then art. 7 wasn't available, and it was decided to create a [TODO]
* The final outcome of art. 7 is that the European Council declares that there is a breach.
* As a possible, additional third stage, the Council may decide to apply sanctions in the form of suspension of rights.
* It's a **discretionary power**, and each step "may" be taken.
* This limits the jurisdiction of the EUCJ to the respect of the procedure, and excludes the merit, since it's a discretionary power.
* Art. 7 is a **gradual mechanism**, and it was designed by the MS, to protect their own interests.
* Barroso (president of the European Commission) called it a "nuclear option", and stated that there should be something between the "nuclear option" and the "soft power" of political persuasion.
* These concerns were voiced in the context of some MS reducing the respect of the rule of law.
* **2012 EUCJ reaction** to the rule of law crisis in Hungary: Hungary decided to lower the age of judges, this was meant to allow judges close to the ruling party.
* The Commission argues that Hungary has created an age discrimination for some categories of civil servants (judges and TODO).
* The **infringement procedure has limits**.
* It needs to rely on a violation of "technical" EU law (e.g. non-discrimination in public employment), not a violation of values (e.g. rule of law).
* It requires an actual infringement.
