# 2022-10-03 - EU Law

## Cyprus

* Cyprus is split in two, the EU acquis is suspended in the Turkey-occupied region.
* Illegal activities carried out with the consent of Northern Cyprus.
* The EU could leverage the fact that EU is a candidate country to react against the violation of the territorial integrity of a M.S. (Cyprus).
* However, this is not the most effective remedy.
* The EU uses economic sanctions against third countries, to force them to adopt a certain behavior.
* The enlargement process in itself is not effective, and traditional international law sanctions are needed to resolve disputes.
* This is the only case where sanctions were taken against a candidate country.

## EU legal order, and its nature: internal perspective

* Van Gend and Loos is a foundational judgement by the Court of Justice.
* It was decided in 1963, at the beginning of the integration process.
* Usually, individuals can't directly rely on rights stated in treaties, it's the exception, not the rule.
* In the case of the EEC Treaty, there are several subjects (citizens of Member States, institutions), the citizens can participate in the life of institutions, so it goes beyond the traditional definition and features of an international treaty.
* This judgement was given 6 years after the entry into force of the EEC Treaty.

## International law perspective

* The EEC Treaty falls under the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (VCLT).
* Art. 5: it's a "without prejudice" clause, the law of treaties codified in the VCLT can be applied to other treaties, without prejudice to the rules of the organization.
* The rationale is to affirm the priority of the rules of the organization in primary law, due to their speciality the rules of the organization prevail over the rules of the VCLT.

## 1996 ICJ advisory opinion on the use of nuclear weapons

* ICJ: the UN's international court.
* Advisory opinions: not legally binding, clarify the court's position on a certain issue.
* The request was made by the WHO after France carried out nuclear test in the Pacific Ocean, that could pose health issues.
* Requests are allowed, as long as they're covered by the mandate of the international court of justice.
* In the first part of the decision, the Court examined the treaty establishing the WHO, to determine its mandate, so that it could determine if it could answer the request.
* The Court states that the treaty is both conventional (an international law agreement) and institutional (creates a new subject of international law), it's a "constituent treaty".

## Comparison between EUCJ and UN ICJ

* In Van Gend en Loos and the ICJ advisory opinion, the courts are asserting the speciality of the treaties.
* EU Court of Justice: the treaty has special features.
* ICJ: the treaty is conventional and institutional.

## Art. 31 VCLT and "implied powers" doctrine

* Interpretation of treaties establishing international organizations follows special rules.
* Art. 31 VCLT is the general rule.
* The "implied powers" doctrine was developed for international organizations.
* If a treaty for an intl. org. mentions specific objectives, but doesn't mention the specific instruments or tools required to achieve them, according to art. 31 VCLT it's impossible to achieve those goals because of the lack of instruments.
* To fill this gap, the doctrine of implied powers allows the institutions to determine what tools are required to achieve the objectives.
* Art. 352 TFEU: codifies the doctrine of implied powers.

## 1995 ICTY "Tadic" case

* ICTY: International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia, was established by the UN SC under chapter 7 of the Charter.
* Tadic's lawyers rejected the jurisdiction of the ICTY, claiming its creation was illegal.
* The ICTY states that the UN Charter is a treaty, but also a constitution that establishes a legal order, with its own rules.

## 2008 Kadi case

* 2008 Maduro's opinion in the Kadi case, which deals with the interactions between the EU and the UN.
* It's an updated version of "Van Gend en Loos".
* Maduro calls the EU legal order a "municipal" (national) legal order, with a transnational dimension.
* In the beginning, the EUCJ established the primacy of EU law over national law, and how EU law couldn't be neutralized unilaterally by MS.
* More recently, the EUCJ has been asserting the independence of EU law from the rest of the international law.
* EU law isn't completely separated from the international legal order.

## Interpretations of EU law

* It's a matter of perspectives.
* From the outside, EU law is still international law, albeit a very peculiar treaty.
* From the inside, in order to assert its autonomy, EU law can be seen as independent legal order from international law.
