# 2022-12-05 - EU Law

## Annulment action (art. 263 TFEU)

Any act adopted by EU entities, which is capable of producing **binding legal effects** towards third parties, can be subject to an annulment action.

The name of the act is irrelevant, only the content is (binding legal effect), with regards to the annulment action.

The Council, Commission, European Parliament and MS can challenge the validity of any act without limitations.

The Court of Auditors, the European Central Bank and the Committee of Regions can bring actions only to protect their prerogatives.

## Annulment action: natural and legal persons

Art. 47 in the Charter proclaims the access to justice for individuals in the EU, but art. 263 imposes strong limitations on the right of individuals to challenge acts that may impose obligations on them.

Extending the right to challenge the acts would increase the Court's workload beyond their ability to manage it.

The Lisbon treaty introduced the possibility to bring an action before a **"regulatory act"** which is of direct concern, and doesn't require implementing measures.

"Regulatory acts" is not a EU law category, and wasn't defined in the Treaty, it's a leftover from the Constitutional treaty that the 

The Court explained that regulatory acts are non-legislative acts, which don't require implementing measures.

If an individual **can't directly bring** an action before the Court of Justice, they can **start a dispute before a national judge**, who has a duty to stay the proceedings, and ask the Court of Justice for a **preliminary ruling**.

This approach can be criticized for two reasons.

The first is that there may be no controversy at the national level, so one would have to be created.

The second is that there's no guarantee the national judge will use the preliminary ruling, it's up to their discretion.

In theory, the indirect approach works, but in practice, this mechanism doesn't grant proper access to justice at the EU level.  On the other hand, increasing locus standi would create much more work for the Court.

## Grounds for annulment

"Essential procedural requirements": respect for the procedure.

"Infringement of the Treaties": respect of the law.

"Misuse of power": the institution is formally respecting the letter of the law, but the objective that is being pursued is against the spirit of the law.  E.g., promoting someone just to remove them from a certain position.

It's hard to prove the misuse of power, since it's entirely based on the institutions' intention.

The annulment has **retroactive effective**, but the Court **can preserve the effects** that have already taken place, in order to protect the legitimate expectation of the parties.

## Failure to act action

If an institution failed to act it's possible to bring them before the Court of Justice.

The applicants are the same as in the annulment action (States, institutions, individuals), under the same conditions.  Individuals still have limited locus standi because they have to demonstrate that the act doesn't need implementation, and was of direct concern to them.

It's a complementary action, that concerns the negative behavior, where as the annulment action concerns a positive behavior.

It's a **purely declaratory** action, and it's not used often because it only results in a declaration of a breach of law.  There are other remedies, e.g. requesting damages for the failure to act.

On the other hand, the annulment action is used fairly often.

## Preliminary ruling mechanism (art. 267 TFEU)

Preliminary rulings are extremely influential in shaping EU law, because it represents a passerelle between the national level, where EU law is implemented, and supranational level, where EU law is produced.

It can be used as a **general interpretation power**, or to **assess the validity** of acts of the EU.

Only **national jurisdictions** can raise questions.

Constitutional courts can pose question to the CJEU, even if they have additional competencies.

Arbitration tribunals can pose questions only if the law requires parties to go before an arbitration tribunal, rather than a court.

Only the courts of last instance, against whom there is no remedy, have a **duty** to raise a question in any case, especially when the question is about the **validity** of EU acts.

If the question is about **interpretation**, then the last instance courts still have a duty, but there are three cases in which they **are not obligated**.

The **first case** is if the Court of Justice has **already given an interpretation** of a certain provision, so a new judgment is unnecessary.

However, the national judge could still ask for an interpretation, in order to try to convince the court to **change its position** (e.g. Bray and Dano case).

The **second case** is if there is **consolidated case law** on a similar issue, which can be applied by analogy.

The **third case** is if the provisions is clear, there's no need to involve the CJEU.

Otherwise, there is a **duty**, because it's **not possible to settle a national law dispute, if the EU law is unclear**.

## Effects of a preliminary ruling

If the question is about the **legality of an act**, if the Court finds it to be against the law, it declares the act null and void, with effects for everyone.

Otherwise, it's only considered binding for the judge, so that the act can be challenged on other grounds by other judges.

**Interpretation of an act**: TODO.
