# 2022-09-22 - EU Law

## Summary of the evolution of the EU

* In the 50's until the 70's ...
* 80's and 90's ...
* 00's ...
* Today the treaties are the TEU, TFEU, EURATOMT and the Charter of fundamental rights.

## Treaty of Lisbon

* It's composed of 7 articles, but they're long articles that amend the existing treaties.
* In art. 2, the treaty on the European Community was renamed to the TFEU, and the amendments changed the numbering of the articles.
* The amendment process can leave old provisions untouched in the treaty, which after the amendments become ineffective.
* Art. 54(2) TEU states the treaty should enter into force in 1993, even after the Lisbon treaty, but the entry into force of the Lisbon treaty is regulated by the treaty itself in art. 6.
* Art. 54(2) TEU is not "harmful", and didn't need to be amended.
* There are provisions that can be ambiguous. E.g., the Lisbon treaty mentions "regulatory acts", which was introduced by the constitutional treaty, which wasn't adopted.
* The Court of Justice had to clarify the meaning of "regulatory acts".
* Calling post-Lisbon EU law "Community law" is not incorrect.

## Charter of fundamental rights

* It wasn't a treaty, but a political document with the aim of defining a set of rights that the M.S. of the EU should follow and protect.
* The 2004 constitutional treaty integrated the Charter of fundamental rights, but was ultimately a failure.
* The Lisbon treaty didn't insert the Charter into the treaties, but only made a reference to it in art. 6(1) TEU.
* The Charter used to be a political document, but now is one of the main documents of the EU.

## 2021 State of the Union speech

* The EU response to the coronavirus pandemic was achieved without having full competence.
* There is a need to reshape how EU primary law is interpreted and applied, and a more flexible interpretation would allow the EU to act even in cases where it's unclear whether it can adopt a decision.
* During crises, it's difficult to amend treaties, but it's still possible to change the approach towards the treaties.

## 2022 State of the Union speech

* The war in Ukraine is also an aggression on the values of the EU.
* Strategic autonomy, the ability to defend the interest of the Union and its M.S.
