# 2022-09-29 - EU Law

## The "Polish plumbers" narrative

* There was an initial transitional period of 7 years suspending free movement of workers.
* It's a measure intended to protect existing M.S., not the States that are joining.
* Accession treaties can provide for such clauses, due to the strong integration that is created with membership to the EU.
* The behavior of a single State can affect every other EU M.S.

## Ukraine

* Decided to submit an application to the EU on February 28 2022.
* The President **asked for a special procedure that would allow for immediate accession** in the EU.
* This request was **due to the ongoing war**.
* There already were bilateral agreements between the EU and Ukraine.
* A 2014 agreement included the possibility for Ukraine to participate in the EU defense plan.
* Also in 2014, Crimea was invaded.
* The agreement was one of the reasons Russia invaded Ukraine.
* Russia felt Ukraine was moving towards EU values, adopting and defending them.

## Arguments regarding a fast-track procedure for Ukraine

* Joining immediately would discriminate against countries that took the long path to join.
* The accession procedure takes a long time, and requires the unanimous will of all the MS.
* EU couldn't be applied to occupied territories.
* Art. 42(7) requires mutual assistance between EU countries in case one is attacked.
* It was triggered in 2015 after the terrorist attack in France, but back then France only requested intelligence cooperation.

## EU institutions' reaction to Ukraine

* It's extremely important that the enlargement procedure must be seen as a serious procedure.
* The EU expressed solidarity to Ukraine, but stated that enlargement will happen in due time.
* On June 17, 2022 the European Commission gave a positive opinion on Ukraine.
* In June still, the Council with the approval of the Parliament qualified Ukraine and Moldova as candidate countries.
* Candidate countries have access to EU funds to introduce reforms to align with EU law.
* However, accession will not be granted automatically, and is still ultimately based on merit.

## Question: art. 11 Italian Constitution

* Art. 11 Italian Cost. only forbids using war to resolve conflicts between States.
* It doesn't forbid using military force in self-defense against external aggression.
* Italy couldn't refuse to ratify Ukraine's accession using the conflict between art. 11 Cost. and art. 42(7).

## Slovenia and Croatia

* At the end of the dissolution of Yugoslavia, the sea borders weren't exactly defined.
* Slovenia acceded to the EU in 2004.
* In 2009, Slovenia and Croatia decided to set up a tribunal with a binding decision.
* The idea was to solve the territorial dispute before Croatia joined.
* M.S. can't have territorial issues that prevent the uniform application of EU law over certain parts of the territory.
* Croatia found out that the judge of the tribunal and Slovenia had communicated with each other.
* Over fears of partiality, the first reaction by Croatia was to reappoint the tribunal, and the second was to abandon the treaty, due to Slovenia's breach of the agreement.
* The tribunal was reappointed, and rejected Croatia's demand to terminate the agreement (art. 60 VCLT).
* Slovenia refused to recognize the award [TODO], because Croatia refused to recognize the arbitral tribunal.
* Slovenia brought Croatia before the Court of Justice, for violating EU law due to the territorial disputes.
* Croatia became a M.S. in 2013, and the arbitral tribunal gave its award in 2017.
* The EU did not pose a veto on Croatia joining, because it was believed it was possible to resolve the issue with arbitration.

## Court of Justice's decision

* The Court of Justice refused its jurisdiction, for two reasons.
* The arbitration agreement was purely international law between two countries, not EU law.
* The territorial delimitation is a sovereign State's prerogative, and the Court has no jurisdiction.
* This isn't the first time an international dispute between two M.S. has been brought before the Court.
* When Ireland brought the UK before the Court over violation of UNCLOS [TODO] it was decided that while it was international law, it was still related to EU law.
* Some members of the EU adopted BITs (bilateral investment treaties), the Court decided to intervene, because those instruments were still related to EU law.
* In the case of Slovenia and Croatia, the agreement was taken in the light of accession, so it could be said to be related to EU law.
* Regarding the exercise of sovereign prerogatives (e.g., how to lose or gain citizenship, the organization of the judiciary), M.S. still have to respect EU law.
