# 2022-11-14 - EU Law

## European Central Bank

* Technical institution, has competence over the MS that have adopted the Euro.
* Can take binding decision, is subject to the scrutiny of the EUCJ.
* Its main duty is controlling inflation.
* Composition: TODO.
* The **executive committee** has executive power, is composed by the president, the vice-president, and four additional members appointed by the member States.
* The TODO has ancillary.

## EU-Turkey statement

* It was adopted in 2016, after a summit of the European Council.
* It was during the migration crisis from the Balkan corridor, and the EU wanted to cooperate with Turkey.
* Turkey agreed to a **readmission scheme/agreement**, which it had already done in the past, but this formalized their obligation.
* According to the **one-to-one** mechanism, for every Syrian citizen subject to readmission (moved from Greece to Turkey), another Syrian citizen will be moved from Turkey to the EU.
* The one-to-one mechanism was not mentioned in the previous bilateral relationships, and is unusual in international practice.
* The EU also promised to pay a sum to Turkey, to speed up the discussion for accession, etc.
* The nature of this statement can't be an international agreement, because while the EU can conclude them, the Council controls the procedure, and if they involve extraordinary budgetary measures, the Parliament must consent.
* Several institutions are involved in international agreement: the European Council negotiates, the Council represents the MS' interests, the Parliament represents democratic control.
* Saying that this document is an international agreement would be violating the institutional balance, principle of conferral, and rule of law.
* However, according to international law (the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties), this would be a treaty, since it contains obligations for the parties, and the form doesn't matter (it's possible to have oral treaties as well).
* Furthermore, there is only a "possible" breach of EU law, if this is interpreted as an international agreement between all EU MS, and Turkey, outside of the framework of the EU.

## Case T-192/16

* The EUCJ had to determine if it could exercise jurisdiction, it couldn't if this was an agreement concluded by MS without involving the EU in any capacity.
* The General Court and then the EUCJ (after an appeal) claimed they were incompetent, because the heads of State weren't acting like members of the European Council.
* However, since MS are using European funds, this implies that the MS see the EU as a common body of the MS, and the EU isn't autonomous.
* The EUCJ's judgment undermines its reconstruction of the EU as an autonomous entity with an autonomous legal order.
* Furthermore, the deal had already been part of 

## 2019 Turkey's unilateral suspension of the EU-Turkey deal

* Turkey unilaterally decided to suspend the EU-Turkey deal, and reopened its borders.
* This was done to convince the EU in intervening in favor of the EU.
* Various press releases on the EU side use words such as "agreement", or "good faith", "valid", which implies that the EU recognizes it as a binding instrument.
* No matter how one looks at it, there's a violation of the rule of law.
* This results in a situation where the responsibility for violation of rights, especially fundamental rights, is unclear, since it could be attributed both to the States or the EU.
* It's not unusual to have informal agreements in the domain of migration, and in general, in the context of crises, which derogate the principle of conferral.

## ECB

* The ECB's main purpose is to maintain the stability of prices.
* It can do so in various ways (by acting on the interest rate, by controlling the amount of foreign currencies or Euros, etc.).
* In 2009, it tries to intervene on the interest rate, but it wasn't successful.
* The Outright Monetary Program allowed the ECB to buy bonds from MS on the secondary financial market, which effectively funded MS in need, but with a conditionality mechanism.
* The European Stability Mechanism (ESM) was developed by EU States, outside the EU framework, and allowed loans under a strict conditionality mechanism.
* The ESM imposed strict budget requirements, which led to austerity measures.
* Before the ESM, the States created the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), a private company based in Luxembourg and where the members were States, because the crisis imposed a quick solution.
* The EFSF was later turned into the ESM, and the ECB's OMP was designed to be complementary with the ESM.

