# 2022-10-26 - EU Law

## Summary

* EU citizenship is a consequence of national citizenship, and doesn't replace it.
* The EUCJ ruled that the exercise of national prerogatives regarding gaining and losing must be exercised with due regard for EU law.

## Gibraltar case

* The EUCJ says that it's possible to extend an extremely important political right, the right to vote in EU elections, to non-EU citizens.
* In other words, it's asserting that **EU citizenship rights can be autonomous and separate** from national rights.
* The only requirement is to have a **close link with the country**.
* In the case of Gibraltar, they're a Commonwealth country, so there is a close link with the UK, a MS.
* It's a sort of "declaration of independence" regarding EU rights, there is a correlation between national and EU citizenship, but some right that can be exercised by EU citizens can also be exercised by third country nationals.

## Citizenship rights and the Head of State

* The Slovak authorities denied entry to the president of Hungary.
* Hungary decided to open an infringement procedure against Czechoslovakia.
* EU law allows limitations of freedom of movement, but only in certain cases.
* Slovakia argues that **under international law**, States are entitled to deny the entry of another head of State in the national territory.
* Hungary argues that **under EU law**, the President of a MS is a EU citizen, and should be treated no differently.
* The EUCJ argues that in this case, intl. law should prevail over EU law.
* The AG argues that in principle, the diplomatic relationships between MS are outside of EU law, because MS in this respect are acting as sovereign countries (just like they would be when activating art. 50).
* In general, EU law can't impose limitations, as long the controversies don't undermine EU law.
* If the diplomatic relationships deteriorate to the point where they start harming the application of EU law, then due to the principle of sincere cooperation, States are no longer free to act, but must resolve the situation.

## Rights and duties of EU citizens

* Political rights: TODO.
* The right to **no discrimination on ground of nationality** (art. 21 Charter) is a "horizontal" right.
* This right doesn't apply to citizens of third countries.
* The European Court of Human Rights asserted this isn't a discrimination on the basis on national origin, because the status between EU citizens and third country nationals is different.
* Third countries are not participating in the EU agreements on cooperation, so their citizens are not being discriminated against when they don't enjoy the same rights as EU citizens do.
