# 2022-09-28 - EU Law

## Accession to UN

* Only States can join.
* States are defined as territorial entities with mostly defined and stable borders, population, and a government able to exercise sovereign power.
* States must be "peace-loving", it's a vague requirement which gives discretionary power to the institutions.
* Must be able and willing to carry out the obligation.
* Procedural requirements (vote by the general assembly, recommendation by the security council).

## Accession to the Council of Europe

* State: same definition as before.
* "European": is a vague requirement, gives the institutions discretionary power to decide whether a country can join.
* Procedural requirements: invitation by the Committee of Ministers, deposit of an instrument of accession.

## Accession to the EU

* Only States can join, and the EU uses the same definition of "State" as international law.
* E.g., the EU has concluded treaties with Kosovo, but it specifies that it aligns with the judgement of the International Court of Justice on the declaration of independence of Kosovo, which says the declaration of independence is not sufficient for statehood.
* Only "European" states can accede to the Union, which is the same issue as the Council of Europe.
* So far, it seems that the geographical criterion is the most important one.
* According to the Commission, the cultural, historical and legal connections to other European countries must be taken into account as well.
* E.g., Israel, Morocco, Tunisia had historical ties to countries in the European continent, and could be considered "European".
* States willing to join must **respect and promote** the **values in art. 2 TEU**.
* **Copenhagen criteria**: requires stable institutions capable of protecting democracy, a stable market economy which can be integrated in the EU internal market without issues, and respect for the acquis (law of the organization).
* Proving all these requirements is time-consuming.
* **Copenhagen dilemma**: the EU is very stringent when assessing new States, but less so when assessing whether Member States are upholding their obligations.

## Accession procedure

* The State willing to join sends an unilateral application to join to the Council.
* The **Commission** assesses whether the requirements are met, and provides a **non-binding opinion**.
* The **European Parliament** gives a **binding opinion** on whether the country can join.
* The **Council** decides by **unanimity**.
* The procedure includes **veto powers and unanimity**, because of the importance another State joining the EU has.
* These decisions are **political**, and **their content can't be subjected to legal scrutiny**, only their **procedural validity** can be controlled.
* **Compliance with the EU acquis** is negotiated, the acquis is split into "chapters" covering specific topics.
* The State must conclude agreements with the Member States, using an international agreement that must be ratified by the parties.
* The more M.S. there are, the more difficult it becomes for new States to join the EU.
* E.g., Turkey's accession would be vetoed by Greece, if Catalonia became independent Spain would veto its accession, etc.
* The "deepening" of the EU has similar issues, M.S. may be unwilling to accept modifications to the treaties, and other M.S. may give concessions and offer opt-outs.
* If a State fails to ratify the Treaty (e.g., Norway in 1994), they won't join the EU.
* From a legal point of view, all M.S. have the same importance, but from a political point of view, some States are more important than others.
* E.g., if a country can't properly implement EU law, or reach some requirements (e.g., protect its external borders), the Council can give it extra time, so that other M.S. can be protected as well.


