# 2022-10-20 - EU Law

## Brexit agreement, part IV: transition

* The idea was to have a transition period lasting ten months until summer 2020, during which EU law was still applicable to the UK, even though it was no longer a MS.
* It was still possible to bring infringement procedures against the UK.

## Brexit agreement, part VI: governance structure

* In the case of a disagreement between the parties, the first step is to have a consultation before the joint committee, in order to find an agreement.
* This is a typical international law instrument.
* If it's not possible to reach an agreement, an arbitration panel can be set up.
* If the dispute concerns the interpretation or application of EU law, the question of law is deferred to the EUCJ.
* This is done to preserve the jurisdiction and mandate of the EUCJ, even though the UK wanted to avoid involving the EUCJ at all.

## MOX case

* Ireland was worried about pollution from a UK recycling plant.
* UNCLOS allowed the parties to resolve disputes with an arbitral tribunal.
* Both Ireland and the UK, but also the EU, are part of the UNCLOS convention.
* The Commission found Ireland to be violating the principle of sincere cooperation, since both Ireland and the UK were MS at the time, and disputes between MS should be resolved by the EUCJ.
* The arbitral tribunal decides to stay the proceedings, and wait until the EUCJ gives its judgement, and later, it renounces its jurisdiction, without being compelled to do so.
* This mechanism was codified in the Brexit agreement.

## Free movement of goods

* Free movement of goods was maintained, but the UK could reintroduce formalities at any time.

## Leaving State 

* The EU institutions should consider the peculiar position of a leaving State.
* EU law is still applicable, but e.g. the Commission can't bring an infringement procedure against a State that is leaving.
* After a State leaves, international law regimes may apply (e.g., WTO rules instead of EU trade rules), but they're less specific than the previous regime.
* Interactions between countries will be regulated by general international law, and all the specific integration of EU is lost, the citizens of UK are no longer EU citizens.

## Previous obligations

* According to the UK, they wanted a "hard" Brexit, and didn't want to pay for previous obligations.
* According to the EU, no new obligations can be imposed after the 2-years deadline, but in any case, previous obligations must be paid.

## Dispute resolution

* According to the text of the 1957 convention for the peaceful resolution of disputes in Europe, the States recognize the jurisdiction of the ICJ for the resolution of disputes and interpretation of treaties.
* Both Germany and the UK are both parties to this convention, so Germany could bring the UK before the ICJ for the violation of an international agreement.
* After the UK left the Union, the Treaties become international treaties, and the obligations therein are international law obligations.
* The UK alleges they're not obligated to respect those obligations, while the other MS think it should.

## Future relations

* Free movement of goods can be in two forms.
* Customs unions works both at the external and internal level, countries agree on a common customs strategy.
* Free trade areas only work in the internal level, and countries don't create common customs rules.
* Due to the resistance of UK, a free trade agreement in the form of trade and cooperation agreement.
* The agreement only mentions international law, and EU law only concerns one of the parties.
* However, the withdrawal agreement, which is more strongly tied to EU law, is still in effect, and the UK isn't completely out of the EU yet.
