# 2022-11-17 - EU Law

## International law

* International **conventions** are only binding between the signing parties.
* International **customs** are binding for all subjects.
* Special international law (conventions) will prevail over general international law (customs), but only in relations among the signing parties.
* There is no absolute hierarchy between the two sources, it depends on the context.
* Perentory international law, or **ius cogens** was recognized by the VCLT, and it refers to rules that can only be derogated by another piece of ius cogens.
* If a treaty contradicts ius cogents, it's considered null and void.
* E.g., the prohibition of torture, genocide, use of force for aggression purposes, etc.
* Ius cogens is general international law, and there's no  set of ius cogens rules.
* Treaties can grant the power to take **decisions**, which have to be consistent with the treaty itself.
* **Soft law** is not binding, and can be used if the States are unable to agree to a binding instrument.

## EU Law

* **Primary law** includes the treaties (founding, accession, their amendments and additional protocols).
* Art. 103 UN Charter says that UN law prevails over other treaties completed by the parties, which includes EU law.
* In the Kadi case, it wasn't possible to apply the normal standards of review, but in the appeal case, the EUCJ created the notion of **constitutional principles** (TODO).
* **Agreements** concluded by the EU, and decisions adopted on the basis of that agreement.
* **EUCJ** case law.
* **General principles**, a flexible category developed by the EUCJ.
* The protection of **human rights** is considered a general principle by the EUCJ.
* At the very beginning, there was no protection of human rights, since the treaties were purely economic in nature.
* The Court first looked at national traditions, and later at international conventions on the matter.
* The protection of human right was later codified, and mentioned in the treaty.
* The issue with principles is that they're fairly indeterminate, especially in the case of less-well-established principles.

## Comparison between international and EU law

* The two systems share many similarities w/r/t/ the sources.
* There is a **proper hierarchy** in EU law, similar to that found in national legal systems.
* In international law, the hierarchy isn't as strong.

## Ordinary revision procedure

* Art. 48(1) states that the treaties can be amended using the **ordinary** or **simplified** revision procedures.
* It's a two-stage process, first with a **Convention**, which is an optional step (the president of the European Council doesn't have to use it), and representatives of the States take part in it, it was introduced to make the process more democratic.
* The second stage is the **intergovernmental** one.
* The "two-speed Europe" system works in theory, but in practice the co-existence of two systems leads to issues.
* Questions: is it possible to amend the treaties outside of art. 48, and are there limitations in the amendment process in art. 48?
