# 2022-11-23 - EU Law

* First cases by the EUCJ: claimed that it couldn't recognize human rights recognized by national courts.
* **Stauder**: TODO.
* **Internationale Handelsgesellschaft**: common constitutional tradition.
* **Nold**: the EU is not a party to the European Convention on Human Rights, so the EU is not obliged to conform to it, but it can still be used as a reference to determine which protections apply.
* **Kadi**: protection of human rights is a constitutional principle of the EU, and enjoys special protection.
* **Art. 6 TEU**: art. 6(1) mentions the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU, art. 6(2) mentions accessing to the European Convention for Human Rights, but art 6(3) states that human rights are considered "general principles" still.
* More recently, the EUCJ is relying solely on the EU Charter, and mentioning the ECHR is happening less frequently, this demonstrates a willingness by the Court to establish a form of "independence".
* Still mentioning the other sources of law is useful, a flexible and informal approach helps in the field of human rights.
* In general, the protection of human rights can't extend the competence of the EU.  E.g., in Ireland after the Lisbon Treaty there were fears that EU law could extend to family law and legalize abortion, but that's not the case, since it would fall outside the competence of EU law.
* Art. 6(2): the obligation to accede to the ECHR can't be an obligation of result, the EU can't unilaterally impose onto a State to join, it's an obligation of conduct.
* The EUCJ found the agreement to join to be inconsistent with EU law, which stopped the negotiations, which were only recently resumed.
* If the EU joined the ECHR, and a case is being decided by the ECtHR, and it involves EU law, it would have to be carried out by the EUCJ.

## International agreements and the EU

* **EU-only agreement**: the EU is fully entitled 
* **Mixed agreement**: the EU may involve another MS either because it lacks a certain competence, or for political reasons.
* **Agreements concluded by MS before the accession**: the MS can still enforce them, to prevent breaching the international commitment.
* **Agreements concluded by MS after the accession**: they must be amended and replaced if inconsistent with EU law.
* **Agreement concluded by all MS**: EU institutions must take them into consideration in interpreting and implementing EU law.
* **MS acting as trustees of the EU**: it's done in cases where the EU can't be part of an agreement, so it names a State to represent it.
* **Inter se agreements inconsistent with EU law**: EU law shall prevail, due to the principle of supremacy.
* **Inter se agreements to support, strengthen, implement EU law**: e.g. the ESM, Schengen Agreement (originally concluded between MS), Dublin Convention (later Regulation, it was created at a time when the EU didn't have competences in immigration).
