# 2022-09-19 - EU Law

## Course introduction

* EU legal order is also a process of integration.
* Relationship between the law of international organizations and the EU.
* **Fist creative force**: strengthening of the co-operation, it was originally a purely economic union, the kind and degree of integration changed over time, treaty by treaty.
* Paris was the first treaty in 1951.
* Treaty of Oslo: Norway is not a MS, but the EU was awarded a Nobel prize.
* Treaty of Rome: in 2004, there was an attempt to adopt a constitutional foundation for the EU, and the Treaty never entered into force due to the opposition of France and The Netherlands.
* **Second creative force**: Enlargement of the EU: fundamental feature of the EU legal order, discussions of a fast-track procedure to include Ukraine in the EU.
* **Crises**: several events (economic and migrant crisis, Coronavirus, war in Ukraine) affected the EU legal order and EU integration process.

## Constitutive elements of the EU legal order

* **Nature of the EU legal order**: whether it's an international legal order, or an autonomous legal order.
* **Values and objectives** of the Union.
* **Subjects of the legal order**: EU incitations, organs, bodies and agencies, and Member States.

## Brexit

* Art. 50 allows MS to leave the EU.
* Brexit took more than 4 years, instead of the expected 2.

## Functions of the EU legal order

* **Law-making**: the principle of conferral determines the EU's competences, the crises have changed the competences.
* **Sources**: of the EU legal order.
* **Interactions**: between EU law, national constitutional courts and national law (principle of primacy, opposition by supreme courts), and international law.
* **Definition of the scope and meaning of EU law**: defined by the EU Court of Justice, but national courts can enforce EU law as well.

## Content of EU law

* **Two pillars of EU law**: the internal market, etc.
* **Weak pillars**: [---]

## Future of EU law (~30m)

* [---]

## Crises that affected the EU integration process

* Coronavirus and the war in Ukraine are changing the EU integration process.

## Exam (35m)

* Attending students: no certification, exam is on the topics discussed in class, teaching materials are available on Virtuale, questions regarding case law of the EUCJ specific questions will only concern a few leading cases, otherwise only the broad judicial attitude is relevant, must bring up-to-date EU treaties.
* Non-attending students: book.

50m: Erasmus and overseas students.

53m: exam in December, before Christmas holiday.

## Conclusions

59m: Eur-Lex websites.

Virtuale: if classes are rescheduled.

Lectures may be suspended: Sep 26th, first week of November.

Course should end by the December 7-8.
