# 2022-11-21 - EU Law

## Procedural limitations for the amendment of treaties

* If we assume that the States are the masters of the Treaties, this means there are no limitations on changing primary law, apart from explicit limitations.
* Art. 48 illustrates the procedure EU MS have to follow when amending EU primary law, it's a self-restraint clause.
* In the Defrenne case, it's stated that apart from specific previsions, the **EU treaties can only be amended in accordance with art. 236** (now the equivalent procedure is art. 48).
* This solution applies only works within the EU legal system.
* In international law, according to the VCLT the treaty that was concluded later prevails, and there are no constitutional concerns.

## Substantive limitations for the amendment of treaties

* The respect of jus cogens is a general international law limitation.
* There are some constitutional principles in the EU legal order, which can't be amended by the MS, and in the Repubblika case, the Court established the **principle of non-regression** with regards to the protection of fundamental values (cf. art. 49 TEU).
* This principle had already been stated in the past, the Court had held that MS couldn't interfere with institutional balance.
* **When MS are amending the treaties, they're still MS, so they still have to respect EU law**.
* EU law wouldn't be autonomous from MS, if they had no limitations in amending.
* However, if all MS decide on an amendment, the EU Commission would have to open an infringement procedure against all MS, and the Court of Justice would have to condemn all MS, and even then, that may not be enough to stop the States.
* In the end, **EU law uses international law instruments**, so it's possible that MS could impose their will against the institutions.

## Conference on the future of Europe

* There is a call to reform the EU Treaty, to integrate the lessons learned since the Lisbon Treaty, including Covid-19.
* It will probably take place in 2025.

## Special revision procedure

* They're called "passerelles", French for "breach".
* It can only be used to intervene in the policy areas of the EU, and with limitations.
* It's possible to make changes in agriculture, transport, etc., but the changes can't extend the competences, that requires the use of the ordinary procedure.
* TODO: other requirements?
* This procedure has been once, to amend art. 136 TFEU, in order to introduce the European Stability Mechanism (ESM).
* TODO: dual nature of the ESM reform.
* The difference between a treaty concluded by MS and a piece of 

## Pringle case

* The Court took a formalistic approach, and considered it a decision, which meant that all EU primary law limitations would apply.
* TODO: cf. the Gauweiler case, economic cooperation instead of monetary policy.
* Art. 136 TFEU was modified correctly by the decision of the European Council, since it didn't change the allocation of competences, as it concerned economic collaboration.
* That raises the question of **whether art. 136 TFEU needed to be modified**, since MS were already free to act, they didn't need to change the treaties to authorize themselves.
* The **political reason** is to codify in EU primary law the guiding principles of financial assistance, in particular strict conditionality.
* It's hard to get changes into EU primary law, but once that happens, the principle can start "circulating", and be used in other mechanisms.
* The **legal reason** is to make sure that the ESM doesn't interfere with or jeopardize EU law.
