# 2022-10-13 - EU Law

* Rule of law can be seen as a **super-value**, since its respect means the respect of other foundational values in the EU.
* The lack of internal borders and mutual recognition originally only applied to commerce.
* Later, the same logic was extended to the mutual recognition of judicial decisions and European arrest warrants.
* There are several institutions in the EU that monitor the respect of the rule of law, and can aid the European Commission in determining if there's risks of violation of the rule of law.
* E.g., the Venice commission, European Judicial Network.
* If there are irregularities, the European Commission will produce an **opinion**, explaining the issues.
* If the State respects the opinion, the procedure ends.
* However, if the State is unable or unwilling, the European Council will produce a **recommendation**.
* Both the opinion and recommendation are non-binding soft law instruments.
* However, the recommendation contains a list of violations and a deadline to resolve them by.
* The purpose of this collaboration procedure is to create a dialogue with the State, so that arts. 7(1) and 7(2) can be used as a last resort.
* This mechanism was used for the first time in Poland, during the rule of law crisis.
* Even though Polish authorities kept rejecting the recommendations of the European Council, eventually the mechanism managed to delay the reforms [TODO].
* The issue is that this mechanism could delay the application of art. 7 for too long.
* There is also a yearly dialogue on the respect of rule of law by the European Council, but while it's useful to establish a common culture, it's not an enforcement tool.
* The Commission and European Council introduced this mechanism and dialogue in 2014.

* In 2018, the EUCJ decided a case regarding the implementation of austerity measures in Portugal.
* One of the required measures was the reduction of the salaries of judges in the court of auditors.
* Portugal rejected this measure, arguing that this would undermine the independence of the judiciary, which in turn would undermine rule of law, both of which are fundamental values in the EU.
* Art. 19 contains two provisions: the first **lists the EU courts**, and their purpose, while the second requires that MS should **introduce legal remedies** to ensure the protection of EU law.
* Art. 19 describes a **multi-level judiciary**, at the supranational and municipal level.
* The Court argues that art. 19 (application of the law by courts) is connected to art. 2 (fundamental values of the EU), so that the **Court is competent in infringement procedures that concern the systemic violation of EU principles**.
* In the Portuguese case, it was a preliminary ruling, and the connection between art. 2 and 19 was only needed so that the Court could declare itself competent to decide whether the austerity measures are affecting rule of law.
* There are two limitations: the **infringement procedure requires a breach**, so it can't be used to prevent them, and it can only be used if it's possible to find a relevant provision.
* E.g., art. 19 can only be used for rule of law violations regarding the judiciary.
* If it isn't possible to find a provision that is a more concrete specification of the general principle, the Court can't do anything.
* The infringement procedure by itself doesn't impose sanctions, it only declares that there is a breach, sanctions can be imposed later.

* In the **Republika case**, Republika is a Maltese NGO, and there are problems with the freedom of expression in Malta.
* At first the Court introduces the **principle of non-regression after accession**.
* Later, the Court explains that the legal foundation for the principle is **art. 49 TEU, which mandates the respect of fundamental values by MS**.
* In other words, it's no longer required to find a specific provision in EU law, one can just rely on art. 49.
* However, this gives a worrying amount of power to judges.
