# 2022-10-10 - EU Law

* Catalonia wishes to be independent, the issues are whether it can, and whether it should, do that.
* If Catalonia became independent, it would be a **secession**, a portion of a State's territory or population either **becomes a new State**, or **becomes part of another State**.
* International law **recognizes secessions**, but **doesn't regulate** how secessions are carried out, it only **regulates the legal effects** (e.g., whether treaties concluded by the State are recognized in the new State, etc.).
* The **Spanish constitution** (art. 2) states that the State is indivisible, a similar provision is found in the Italian constitution as well.
* In Italy both Veneto and Lombardia had a referendum asking for more autonomy, but not secession.
* The **principle of self-determination** has been used as an argument for secession, by organized groups of people wishing to gain autonomy. E.g. Lega Padana in Italy, Quebec in France.
* However, this is an erroneous application, the principle of self-determination was created by the UN and can only be used by colonial States, or in particular cases, such as apartheid.
* The **EU was created by States**, and its competences are determined by the **principle of conferral**, whether its MS decided to confer certain competences to the EU.
* According to art. 4(2) **TEU**, the **territorial integrity of a State is entirely national affair**, and the EU has no competences.
* Catalonia doesn't need to be recognized as a State in order to be independent, but recognition is important.
* Kosovo is not recognized as a State by Spain because it's similar to Catalonia's claims, and they don't want to create a precedent.
* The Catalonia referendum was due to a law passed in the autonomous community.
* The referendum was not a mere consultation, but was binding, and the majority of people agreed with independence.
* The Government challenged the referendum and law behind it in the Constitutional court, who found it contrasted with the Spanish constitution (art. 2).
* The only solution at the national level is to change the Constitution.
* The EU Commission comments that the referendum isn't legal, because it violates the only applicable source of law, the Spanish constitution.
* Even if the referendum was legal, Catalonia would still have to go through the accession process (art. 49 TEU), which in average takes more than 10 years.
* **Junqueras I Vies** case concerns interactions between the national and EU legal order.
* He was placed in provisional detention during the investigation for criminal proceedings related to the referendum, but in the meanwhile he was elected in the European Parliament.
* The process of election to the European Parliament is left entirely to the States, and Spain requires EU parliament members to swear on the Constitution.
* However, Junqueras I Vies was not allowed to do so due to his provisional detention.
* He argued that since he was elected to the European Parliament, he already enjoyed parliamentary immunities (protocol 7 to the TFEU), and didn't have to swear on the Constitution to enjoy them.
* He argued he should be released, allowed to swear on the Constitution, and be free to take his seat in the Parliament.
* According to the Commission and the European Parliament, it's purely a national affair.
* According to the European Parliament, since the rights at stake are the rights of the European citizens, there would be a violation of the principle of representative democracy.
* Later, Junqueras I Vies was **convicted**, and sentenced to a prison term, and forbidden from holding public charges.
