# 2022-10-06 - EU Law

* National security is no longer the exclusive responsibility of States.
* Regulation 2019/452: due to the principle of sincere cooperation, cooperation duties are introduced for States, and they're related to national security.
* Failure to follow those duties would be a violation of EU law.

## Decision taken in the context of the refugee crisis

* To deal with the 2015 refugee crisis, the Dublin Regulation was adopted.
* It defines the criteria to identify the M.S. responsible to process asylum requests.
* One of the requirements is that applications must be processed in the "State of first entry", even if the asylum seekers moved to another country, and had to be relocated back.
* This created additional pressure on first-entry States, and there was an agreement to derogate the Dublin Regulation, and distribute applications among M.S.
* Some States decided not to implement this decision, but this is a breach of EU law.
* Poland and Hungary framed their actions as a protection of national security, which is an exclusive prerogative of M.S., and so the Court shouldn't have jurisdiction
* The Court affirms its jurisdiction, and states that national security exception can't be used as a general reservation for EU law.
* The principle of loyalty, and solidarity between MS, can affect national security, and in general is one of the founding principles the process of integration is based on.

## Sayn-Wittgenstein case

* Ilonka Sayn works in real estate, and sells castles.
* She is adopted by a German nobleman, and gains the title "von Wittgenstein".
* She can't use this title in Austria, because of a law that abolished the use of noble titles in names.
* Therefore, her legal name in Germany and Austria is different.
* [TODO]
* In order for States to invoke the national identity exception, they need to determine the objective of the law, and whether the objective of the law is compatible with EU law.
* It's a sort of counter-limit to the doctrine of counter-limits.
* There are two problems.
* The first problem is that only M.S. have been asked to show loyalty to the Union, but never the other way.
* The second is that loyalty is based on the assumption that there is mutual trust between States.
