
# 2022-10-05 - EU Law

* Notion of State in EU law: same as intl. law.
* Responsibility of States: same as intl. law, any wrongdoing by a State's internal organs or institutions is the State's responsibility.

## Art. 4 TFEU: principle of conferral

* As a general rule, intl. orgs. must act within their mandate.
* The principle of conferral is also mentioned in art. 5 (limits of conferral) and art. 3 (exclusive competences of the EU).
* The principle of conferral isn't meant to "reassure the member States", but to send a message to EU institutions.
* The failure of the constitutional treaty meant a **return to intergovernmentalism**, and so to the principle of conferral.
* The Court of Justice in particular is asked to apply the principle of conferral in a strict manner, which wasn't the case previously.
* The negative wording is meant to prevent possible violations of the principle.

## Equality of M.S. 

* Member States are equal before the law, and are equal in their national identity (art. 4(2) TFEU).
* The latter provision is due to the special nature of EU law.
* Differentiated treatment seems to be at odds with equal treatment.
* It can be achieved with a Treaty revision, or by using enhanced cooperation (by which a limited number of States can achieve stronger cooperation in certain fields)
* Since all MS are equal, it's possible for all of them to decide that some States should be treated differently.
* However, individual States can't opt-out of treaty provisions, and it would be a breach of said treaty to do so.
* E.g., the Supreme Court in Germany decided not to recognize the quantitative easing decision.

## Art. 4(2) TFEU

* National identity clause: EU must respect the legal order of MS.
* This was due to intergovernmentalism in the Lisbon treaty.
* It's a codification of the "counter-limits" or "Solange" doctrine, where EU law can prevail until it starts affecting the integrity of the fundamental internal order.
* MS have used it with increasing frequency to block the adoption of EU law.
* The contents of a State's "national identity" can be defined in two ways.
* It can be defined either by the national supreme courts, who are in the best position to recognize their national identity.
* Otherwise, it can be defined at a supranational level by the Court of Justice.
* National security is the exclusive concern of M.S.

## Art. 4(3) TFEU

* The principle of sincere (or "loyal") cooperation requires that MS should assist each other in achieving the EU's objectives.
* In international law, it's the "pacta sunt servanda" principle, and in constitutional law, it's the principles of cooperation found in federal States (the individual States must cooperate with the national government to achieve the national objective).
* The other provisions in art. 4(3) besides the principle of loyal cooperation are due to the stratification of treaties, and because the ones in charge for the execution of EU laws are the States themselves.


