# 2022-11-24 - EU Law

* The EU, as an international organization, adopts many binding acts.
* Nature of the EU-Turkey deal.

## Motivation

* The **heading** of the act indicates which institution adopted it, in what year and date, its number, and the title, which may contain information about the relationship with other acts.
* E.g., the 2016 GDPR regulation repealed the 1995 Directive, the Single Market For Digital Services Regulation instead amended the previous Directive.
* The acts must be duly motivated, to indicate the motivation of the act, the policy areas affected, the goals that are intended to be achieved.
* The motivation of the act is contained in the **recitals** (found after "Whereas"), at the beginning of the act.
* The **principles of subsidiarity and proportionality** have to be respected, or else the act would be declared invalid by the CJEU.
* Usually, there's one recital at the end, dealing with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality.
* In general, every recital is related to one article, they follow the same order, and are a logical development.
* According to the EUCJ, the institutions have a certain degree of discretion when applying those principles.

## Legal basis

* The legal basis is **necessary for the validity of the act**.
* The **center of gravity** of the act (the most important policy area) determines its **legal basis**, which is usually a single article, but exceptionally, if it's not possible to find a single center of gravity, there can be multiple legal bases (articles).

## Provisions

* Articles can be grouped into chapters and sections, especially in long acts.
* Obligations can vary in how generic or specific they are.
* Not all articles contain obligations, they may contain indications about the subject matter, objectives, material scope of the act, definitions, etc.
* One is expected to respect EU law only if it's been made public, which is done by publishing it in the Official Journal of the EU.
* The act is first adopted, then published, and there's usually an article specifying the entry into force, and its application.
* In the case of very complex acts (e.g. the GDPR or DSA), the recipients of the act are given some time in order to comply with the obligations.
* Some provisions may be applied earlier, before the application of the whole act.

## Typical binding acts

* The bindings acts are **regulations, directives and decisions**, meaning they can contain obligations, while opinions and recommendations can't.
* As a general principle, the EU is free to choose which kind of act to use, but sometimes it is forced to adopt a certain act.
* Bindings acts are not always legislative in nature, but all legislative acts are binding.
* A legislative act is one adopted using the **legislative procedure**, a fact which is mentioned in the heading, before the recitals.

## Regulations

* Most intrusive act.
* They are general, but can mentions individuals as well, as long as they're part of the groups the regulation applies to.
* Can impose obligations.

## Decisions

* Decisions used to be the typical administrative act, addressed to specific cases.
* Currently, decisions are used in multiple ways, including having general application, like regulations.

## Binding

* Regulations and decisions can be binding for individuals as well, while directives are only binding for MS.
* Regulations are directly applicable, and unlike directives, don't have to be transposed into law.
* The only obligation States have towards a regulation is respect it, and adopt delegated or implementing acts as needed.
* Decisions are also directly applicable.
* The main difference between regulations and decisions is the scope of applications.
* The fact that they're directly applicable means that if they grant rights, national judges can protect those rights.

